Introduction of Collections

- An array is an indexed collection of fixed number of homogenous data elements. The main advantage of arrays is we can represent multiple values by using single variable so that readablity of the code will be improved.

Limitations of arrays 

- Arrays are fixed in size ie once we create an array there is no chance of increasing or decreasing the size based on our requirement. based on this to use arrays concepts compulsory we should know size in advance which may not possible always

- Arrays can hold only homogenous datatypes elements

```java

Student s = new Student [100000]

s[0] = new Student();
s[1] = new Customer();

// CE : incompatible types
// found : Customer
// required : Student


Object [] a = new Object[100000]

a[0] = new Student();
a[1] = new Customer();

```

- Arrays concept is not implemented based on some standard datastructure and hence ready made method support is not available for every requirement we have to write the code explicitly which increases complexity of programming.


To overcome above problems of arrays we should go for collections concept. 

Collections are dynamic in nature ie based on our requirement we can increase or decrease the size.

Collections can hold both homogenous and heterogenous objects, Every collection class is implemented based on some standard datastructure. Hence for every requirement readymade support is available. Being a programmer we are responsible to use those method and we are not responsible to implement those methods.


Difference between arrays and collections


|Arrays| Collections|
|-|-|
|Arrays are fixed in size ie once we create array we cant increase or decrease the size based on our requirement   | Collections are dynamic in nature ie based on our requirement we can increase or decrease the size
|W.r.t memory Arrays are not recommended to use   | W.r.t memory Collections are recommmended to use
|W.r.t performance Arrays are recommenede to use   |W.r.t performance Collections are not recommended to use 
|Only homogenous elements   | Both homogenouse and heterogenous elements
|No underlyding datastructure for array and hence readymade method support not available. For every requirement we have to write code explicitly which increases complexity  | Every collection class is implemented with standard datastructure - for every method ready made suppport is available. Being a programmer we can use these methods directly we are not responsible to implement those methods.
| Arrays can hold both primitives and object  | Collections can hold only object types and not primitives



Collection (known as Container in C++) : If we want to represent a group of individual objects as a single entity then we should go for collection.

Collection Framework (known as STL - Standard Template Library in C++): It contains several classes and interfaces which can be used to represent a group of individual objects as single entity.


9 Key Interfaces of collection framework

- Collection
- List
- Set
- SortedSet
- NavigableSet
- Queue
- Map
- SortedMap
- NavigableMap

Collection(I) - If we want to represent a group of individual objects as a single entity then we should go for collection.

Collection Interface defines the most common methods which are applicable for any collection object.

In general collection interface is considered as root interface of collection framework.

There is no concrete class which implements collections interface directly.



What is difference between collection and collections ?

Difference between collection and collections 


Collection is an interface if we want to represent if we want to represent group of individual objects as single entity then we should go for collection

Collections is an utility class present in java.util package to define several utility method for collection objects like sorting, searching,etc.


List(I) : It is the child interface of collection if we want to represent a group of individual object as a single entity where duplicates are allowed and insertion order must be preserved then we should go for list.







Collection (I)  = 1.2 version
- List (I)  =  1.2 version
    - ArrayList  =  1.2 version
    - LinkedList   = 1.2 version
    - Vector  = 1.0 version (legacy classes)
        - Stack
- Set (I)
    - HashSet  =  1.2 version
        - LinkedHashSet = 1.4 version
    - SortedSet (I) =  1.2 version
        - NavigableSet (I) =  1.6 version
            - TreeSet =  1.2 version
    - Queue (I) = total concept came in 1.5 Version
        - PriorityQueue
        - BlockingQueue
            - PriorityBlockingQueue
            - LinkedBlockingQueue
    

In 1.2 version vector and stack classes are reengineered to implement List Interface


Set(I) - It is child interface of collection, If we want to represent group of individual objects as a single entity where duplicates are not allowed and insertion order not required then we should go for set interface.

SortedSet(I) - It is the child interface of set, if we want to represent a group of individual objects as a single entity where duplicates are not allowed and all objects should be inserted according some sorting order then we should go for some SortedSet(I)

NavigableSet(I) - It is a child interface of SortedSet. It contains several methods for Navigation Purposes.


Differences between List and Set


List | Set
|-|-|
| Duplicates are allowed | Duplicates are not allowed |
| Insertion order preserved | Insertion order not preserved |



Queue (I) It is child interface of collection - If we want to represent group of individual object prior to procession then we should go for queue. Usually queue follows FIFO but based on our requirement we can implement our own priority order also.

Before sending a mail, we have to store all mail ids in some data structure - In which order we sent mail in that order only they should be delieverd. In such cases queue is best choice.






==Map== is not child interface of collection, if we want to represent to a group of objects as key, value pairs then we should go for map.

```
101 : durga
102 : ravi
103 : jiganesh
```

Both key and value are objects only - duplicate keys are not allowed but values can be duplicated

```
- Map                                        -  Dictionary
    - HashMap                                       |
        - LinkedHashMap                             |
    - WeakHashMap                                   |
    - SortedMap(I)                                  |
        - NavigatbleMap                             |
            - TreeMap                               |
    - IdentityHashMap                               |
    - Hashtable      <-------------------------------
        - Properties
    

```

IdentityHashMap and LinkedHashMap in 1.4V
Dictionary and Hashtable and Properties from 1.0V
Navigationmap came in 1.6 V
all others in 1.2V

SortedMap (I) - It is child interface of map if we want to represent group of key value pairs according to some sorting order of keys then we should go for SortedMap. In SortedMap the sorting should be based on key but not based on value.


NavigatbleMap (I) - It is child interface of sorted map it defines several methods for navigation purposes.



Sorting
- Comparable (I)
- Comparator (I)

Cursors
- Enumeration (I)
- Iterator (I)
- ListIterator (I)

Utility Classes 
- Collections (I)
- Arrays  (I)


The following are legacy character present in collection framework
- Enumeration (I)
- Dictionary (AC)
- Vector
- Stack
- Hashtable
- Properties