**Is-a relationship**


Is-a relationship is also known as Inheritance

The main advantage of is-a relationship is code reusablity.  

By using extends keywords we can implement is-a relationship



```java

class P {
    public void m1(){
        System.out.println("Parent")
    }
}


class C extends P {
    public void m2(){
        System.out.println("Child")
    }
}



```


```java

class Test{
    public static void main (String[] args){

        // Case 1 :
        P p = new P ()
        p.m1();
        p.m2(); // CE : cannot find symbol : method m2() location : P

        // Case 2 : 
        C c = new C ();
        c.m1();
        c.m2();

        // Case 3 : 
        P p1 = new C ();
        p1.m1();
        p2.m2(); // CE : cannot find symbol : method m2() location : P

        // Case 4 : 
        C c1 = new P (); // CE : incompatible types found : P required : C 
         
    }
}

```

Conclusions

1. Whatever methods parent has by default available to child and hence in the child reference we can call both child and parent class methods

2. Whatever methods child has by default not available to parent and hence on the parent reference we cannot call child specific methods

3. Parent reference can be used to hold child object but using that reference we cannot call child specific methods but we can call methods present in parent class

4. Parent reference can be used to hold child object but child reference cannot be used to hold parent object.




Without Inheritance 


```java
class VehicleLoan{
    // 300 methods
}

class PersonalLoan{
    //250 methods
}

class HousingLoan{
    // 350 methods
}


// 900 methods
// 9 hours
```



With Inheritance

```java


class Loan {
    // 250 common methods
}

class VehicleLoan extends Loan {
    // 50 methods
}

class PersonalLoan extends Loan {
    // 0 methods
}

class HousingLoan extends Loan {
    // 100 methods
}

// 400 methods
// 4 hours
```


The most common methods which are applicable for any type of child, we have to define in parent class.

The specific methods which are applicable for a particular child we have to define in child class.

Total Java API is implemented based on inheritance concept the most common method which are applicable for any java object are defined in object class and hence every class in java is a child class of object either directly or indirectly so that object class methods by default available to every java class without rewriting due to this object class acts as root for all java classes.

Throwable class defines the most common methods which are required for every exception and error classes hence this class acts as root for java exception hierarchy.

**Multiple Inheritance**

A java class cannot extend more than one class at a time, hence java wont provide support for multiple inheritance in classes.

Note : If our class doesnt extend any other class then only our class is direct child class of object.

Class A is child of object

If our class extends any other class then our class is indirect child class of Objec

Class A extends B

Class A is child of B and Class B is child of Object  ( Multilevel Inheritance )



Either directly or indirectly java wont provide support for multiple inheritance with respect to class.

**Why java wont provide support for multiple inheritance ?**

There may be a chance of ambiguity problem hence java wont provide support for multiple inheritance but interface can extends any number of interface simultaneouly hence jave provide supports multiple inheritance with support to interfaces


- P1 contains m1 ()
- P2 contains m1 ()

C.m1() ; Ambiguity Problem


```java
interface A {

}

interface B {

}

interface C extends A, B {

}

```

**Why ambiguity problem wont be there in interfaces**

Even though multiple method declaration are available but implementation is unique and hence there is no chance of ambiguity problem in interfaces.

- A contains m1 ()
- B contains m1 ()

C.m1() ;

Strictly speaking through interface we wont get any inheritance.


**Cyclic Inheritance**


Cyclic Inheritance is not allowed in Java ofc it is not required 

examples ðŸ‘

> class A extends A

```
CE : cyclic Inheritance involving A
```
```
class A extends B

class B extends A
```

```
CE : cyclic Inheritance involving A
class A extends B
```
