Has-a Relationship is also known as composition or aggregation.

There is no specific keyword to implement has-a relation but most of the time we are depending on new keyword.

The main advantage of has-a relationship is reusablity of code.



```java

class Car{
    Engine e = new Engine();
}

class Engine {
    // Engine specific functionality
}
```

> Car has-a Engine reference


Difference between composition and aggregation

**Composition :**

Without existing container object if there is no chance of existing contained object then container and contained objects are strongly associated and this strong association is nothing but composition.


University consists of several departments without existing university there is no chance of existing department. Hence university and department are strongly associated and this strong association is nothing but composition.


```
University (container object)

(contained objects)
    | - CSE  
    | - EEE
    | - MECH 

```

**Aggregation :**

Without existing container object if there is chance of existing contained object then container and contained objects are weakly associated and this weak association is nothing but aggregation.

Department consists of several professor without existing department there may be a chanch of existing professor object hence department or professor objects are weakly associated and these weak association is nothing but aggregation.


```
Deparment (container object)

(contained objects)
    | - Professor1  
    | - Professor2  
    | - Professor3

```

Note : In composition objects are strongly associated whereas in aggregation object are weakly associated.

In composition container object holds directly contained objects whereas in aggregation container objects hold just references of contained objects.

Is-a vs Has-a

If we want a total functionality of a class authomatically then we should go for is-a relationship


````
Person Class

Student Class

Student is a Person


````

If we want part of functionality then we should go for has-a relationship



```
Test Class // 100 methods


Demo required few methods hence has Test class


class Demo{
    Test t1 = new Test()
    t1.m1();
}


```


