**Arrays**

1. Introduction
2. Array Declaration
3. Array Creation
4. Array Initialization
5. Array Declaration, Creation and Initialization in single line
6. lenght vs length()
7. Anonymous Array
8. Array Element Assignments
9. Array Variable Assignments



**Introduction of Array**


An Array is an indexed collection of fixed number of homogenous data elements. The main advantage of arrays is we can represent hugh number of values by using single variable so that readablity of the code will be improved but the main disadvantage of arrays is fixed in size ie once we create an array there is no chance of increasing or decreasing the size based on our requirement hence to use arrays concept compulsory we should know size in advance which may not be possible always.

**Array Declaration**


One dimension Array declaration : 

Valid array declarations : 

```
int[] x; Recommended because name is clearly separated from type

int []x;

int x[];

```


> int[6] x; (invalid)

At time of declaration we cannot specify sizeotherwisewe will get compile time error


Two dimensional Array declaration : 


Valid two dimensional array declaration: 

```
int[][] x;
int [][]x;
int x[][];
int[] []x;
int[] x[];
int []x[];
```

which of the following are valid and mention dimension for a and b?
```
int[] a, b; => a : 1 , b: 1
int[] a[], b; => a : 2 , b: 1
int[] a[], b[]; => a : 2 , b: 2
int[] []a,b ; => a : 2 , b: 2
int[] []a, b[]; => a :2  , b: 3
int[] []a, []b; (invalid) CE : If we want to specify dimension before variable that facility is applicable only for first variable in declaration. If we are trying to apply for remaining variable we will get compile time error.
```

> int[] []a, []b, []c;

invalid for b and c



Three dimensional array declaration:

valid three dimensional array declaration

```
int[][][] a;
int  [][][]a;
int a[][][];
int[] [][]a;
int[] a[][];
int[] []a[];
int[][] []a;
int[][] a[];
int [][]a[];
int []a[][];
```


**Array Creation**

> int[] a = new int[3];

Every array in java is object only, hence we can create array using new operator.

> System.out.println(a.getClass().getName())

Output : 
> [I

For every array corresponding classes are available and these classes are part of Java language and not available to the programmer level.



| Array type | Corresponding Class Name |
| - | - |
|int [ ] | [I
|int [ ][ ] | [[I
| double [ ] | [D
| short [ ] | [S
| byte [ ] | [B
| boolean [ ]| [Z


1 At the time of array creation compulsory we should specify the size otherwise we will get compile time error.

> int[] x = new int[] (invalid)
> int[] x = new int[6] (valid)
> int[] x = new int[0] (valid)

It is legal to have an array with size 0 in java

> int[ ] x = new int[-3]; 
If we are trying to specify array size with negative int value then we will get runtime exception saying negative array size exception.
```
Runtime Exception : NegativeArraySizeException
```

```
int [] x = new int[10];

int [] x = new int['a'];


byte b = 20;
int[] x = new int[b];

short s = 25;
int[] x = new int[s];
```

To specify array size the allowed datatypes are byte, short, char, int. If we are trying to specify any other type then we will get compile time error

> int[] x = new int[10l]

```
CE : possible loss of precision
    found : long
    required : int
```

Maximum Allowed Int array size ?

> int[] x = new int[2147483648];

```
CE : integer number too large
```

> int[] x = new int[2147483647];

2147483648 * 4 bytes of memory required - might get runtime exception 

The maximum allowed array size in java is 2147483647 which is maximum value of int datatype.

Even in int[] x = new int[2147483647]; we might get runtime exception if sufficient memory not available.

Two Dimensional array creation

In Java two dimensional array are not implemented using. matrix style. Some people followed array of arrays approach for multi dimensional array creation. the main advantage of this approach is memory utilisation will be improved.

Example 1
```

int[][] x = new int[2][]
x[0] = new int[2]
x[1] = new int[3]
```

Example 2
```
int[][][] x = new int[2][][];
x[0] = new int[3][];
x[0][0] = new int[1];
x[0][1] = new int[2];

x[1][0] = new int[2][2];
```

Which of the following array declaration are valid ?

```
int[] a = new int[];   (invalid)
int[] a = new int[3];    (valid)
int[][] a = new int[][];   (invalid)
int[][] a = new int[3][];     (valid)
int[][] a = new int[][4];   (invalid)
int[][] a =  new int[3][4];     (valid)
int[][][] a = new int[3][4][5];     (valid)
int[][][] a = new int [3][4][];    (valid)
int[][][] a = new int[3][][5];     (invalid)
int[][][] a = new int [][4][5];    (invalid)
```

**Array Initialization**

int[] x = new int[3];

>System.out.println(x);  =>  [I@3e25a2
>System.out.println(x[0]); => 0

Once we create an array every element in array is initialized with default values.Whenever we are trying to print any reference variable internally toString method will be call which is implemented by default to return the string in following form

> classname@hashcode_in_hexadecimal_form

int[][] x = new int[2][3];

>System.out.println(x);  =>  [[I@3e25aa
>System.out.println(x[0]); => [I@2366ab
>System.out.println(x[0][0]); => 0


Example 3

int[][] x = new int[2][];

>System.out.println(x);  =>  [[I@3e25aa
>System.out.println(x[0]); => null
>System.out.println(x[0][0]); => RE : NullPointerException


If you are trying to perform any operation on null then we will get runtime exception for NullPointerException

Once we create any array every array element by default initialized with default values, If we are not satisfied with default values we can override these values with customized values

```java


int[] x = new int [6];
x[0] = 123
x[1] = 214
x[2] = 421
x[3] = 412
x[4] = 532
x[5] = 523
```
If you do x[6] = 70 or x[-6] = 80 RE : ArrayIndexOutOfBoundException
If you do x[2.5] = 25

```
CE : Possible loss of precision 
    found : double 
    required int

 ```

 If we are trying to access array element with out of range index with positive or negative value then we will get runtime exception saying ArrayIndexOutOfBoundException



**Array declaration creation and initialization in single line**


```
int[] x;
x = new int[3];
x[0] = 10;           =>         int[] x = {10, 20, 30}
x[1] = 20;
x[2] = 30;

```


We can declare, create and initialize an array in single line like above.

char[] ch = {'a', 'e', 'i', 'o', 'u'}

For two dimensional array

We can extend this shortcut for multidimensional arrays also.

> int[][] x = {{10,20}, {30,40,50}}



int[][][] x = {{{10,20,30}, {40,50,60}}, {{70,80},{90,100,110}}}

```
System.out.println(x[0][1][2]) > 60
System.out.println(x[1][0][1]) > 80
System.out.println(x[2][0][0]) > RE : ArrayIndexOutOfBoundException
System.out.println(x[1][1][1]) > 100
System.out.println(x[2][1][0]) > RE : ArrayIndexOutOfBoundException
```

If we want to use shortcut compulsory we should perform all activities in single line. if we are trying to divide in multiple line we will get compile time error
```

int[] x;

x = {1, 2, 3} 

```


```
CE : illegal start of expression
```

**length vs length()**

length is a final variable applicable for arrays, length variable represents size of the array. 


Example
```
int[] x = new int[6];
```
> System.out.println(x.length()) 

```

CE: cannot find symbol
    symbol : method length()
    location: class int[]
```

> System.out.println(x.length) > 6 

String s = "DURGA";

> System.out.println(s.length) 

```
CE: cannot find symbold
    symbol : variable length
    location : class.java.lang.String
```

> System.out.println(s.length())

length() method is final method applicable for string object, length method returns number of characters present in the string.


length variable applicable for arrays but not for String objects whereas length() method applicable for String objects but not for arrays


String[] s = {"A", "AA", "AAA"}

> System.out.println(s.length) (valid)

> System.out.println(s.length())

```

CE: cannot find symbol
    symbol : method length()
    location: class int[]
```


> System.out.println(s[0].length) 

```
CE: cannot find symbold
    symbol : variable length
    location : class.java.lang.String
```
> System.out.println(s[0].length()) (valid)





int[][] x = new int[6][3];

> System.out.println(x.length) > 6
> System.out.println(x[0].length) > 3


In multidimensional array - length variable represents base size but not total size


There is no direct way to find total length of multidimensional array but indirectly we can find as follows

x[0].lenght + x[1].length




**Anonymous Arrays**


Sometimes we can declare array without name such type of nameless arrays are called anonymous arrays. The main purpose of anonymous arrays is just for one time usage.

We can create anonymous arrays as follows :


```java
class Test {
    public static void main (String[] args){
        sum(new int[] {10, 20, 30}) // Anonymous Array   
    }

    public static void sum (int[] x){
        int total = 0
        for (int x : x){
            total += x
        }
        System.out.println(" The sum : " + total)
    }
}
```
In above example just to call sum method we require an array, but after completing call we are not using that array anymore for this one time requirement. For this anonymous array is best choice.

while creating anonymous array we cant specify the size otherwise we will get compile time error. We can create multidimensional anonymous arrays as well.

> new int[3] {10, 20, 30} (invalid)
> new int[] {10, 20, 30} (valid)
> new int[][] {{10,20},{30,40}}

Based on our requirement we can give the name for anonymous array then it is no longer anonymous

> int[] x = new int[]{10, 20, 30}


**Array Element Assignment**



In the case of primitive type arrays as array elements we can provide any type which can be implicitly promoted to declared type.
Example 1: Primitive type arrays
```
int[] x = new int[5]
x[0] = 10;
x[1] = 'a';

byte b = 23;
x[2] = b;

short s = 30;
x[3] = s

x[4] = 10l; 
```
```

For x[4] = 10l;

CE : possible loss of precision
    found : long
    required : int
```

In case of float type array - allowed data types are byte, short, char, int, long, float if it is primitive type array


Example 2 :Object Type Arrays
```
Object[] a = new Object[10]
a[0] = new Object(); (valid)
a[1] = new String("Durga"); (valid)
a[2] = new Integer(10); (valid)

```

In case of object type arrays as array element we can provide declared type object or child class objects



Example 3 : Abstract Type Arrays
```
Number [] n = new Number [10];
n[0] = new Integer(10); (valid)
n[1] =new Double (10.5);  (valid)
n[2] = new String ("Durga");  (invalid)
```

```
CE : incompatible types
    found : java.lang.String
    required : java.lang.Number
```

Example 4 : Interface type array

For Interface type arrays as array elements its implementation class objects are allowed

```
Runnable [] r = new Runnable [10];

r[0] = new Thread();
r[1] = new String("DURGA");
```

```
CE : possible loss of precision
    found : java.lang.String
    required : java.lang.Runnable
```




|Array type | Allowed element types |
|---|---|
|primitive arrays| Array type which can be implicitly promoted to declared type|
|Object type Arrays | Either declared type or its child class objects |
|Abstract Class type Arrays| Its child class objects are allowed| 
|Interface type array | Its implementation class objects are allowed |




** Array variable assignment **


Case 1 : 


```
int [] x = {10, 20, 30, 40};
char [] ch = {'a', 'b', 'c', 'd'};


int[] b = x; (valid)
int[] c = ch; (invalid)

```
```
CE: incompatible types
    found : char[]
    required : int[]
```

char -> int valid
char[] -> int[] not valid


Element level promotions are not applicable at array level. 

char element can be promoted to int type, char array cannot be promoted to int array


Which of the following promotions will be performed automatically


```
char -> int : valid
char[] -> int[] :  invalid
int -> double  : valid
int[] -> double [] :  invalid
float -> int  : invalid
float -> int[]  : invalid
String -> Object  : valid
String[] -> Object[] :  valid
```

but in the case of object type arrays child class type array can be promoted to parent class type array.


Valid : 

```
String [] s = {"A", "B", "C"};
Object [] a = s ;

```


Case 2 : Reference variable will be reassigned
```
int [] a = {10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60};
int [] b = {70, 80};

a = b; (valid)
b = a; (valid)
```
Whenever we are assigning one array to another array internal elements wont be copied just the reference variables will be reassigned.


Case 3: 

Whenever we are assigning one array to another array the dimension must be matched - For example in place of one dimensional int array we should provide one dimensional array only. If you are trying to provide any other dimension then we will get compile time error.


int[][] a = new int[3][];
a[0] = new int[4][3];
```
CE : incompatible types
    found : int[][]
    required : int[]
```
a[0] = 10
```
CE : incompatible types
    found : int
    required : int[]
```

Whenever we are assigning one array to another array both dimensions and types must be matched but sizes are not required to match.
































