




Whenever we are writing Java code it is highly recommended to follow coding standard. Whenever we are writing any component the name should represent the purpose of component or functionality

The main purpose is readablity and maintainablity will be improved.


==Bad Way==
```java

class A {
    public int m1(int x , int y){
        return x+y
    }
}

```

==Good Way==
```java
package com.durgasoft.scjp;


public class Calculator {

    public static int addition (int number1, int number2){
        return number1 + number2;
    }
}

```


Coding Standards for classes

1. Usually class name are nouns and should start with uppercase character and if it contains multiple words every inner word should start with uppercase character (PascalCase Convention)

example : StringBuffer


Coding Standards for interfaces

1. Usually interface names are adjectives should start with uppercase character and if it contains multiple words. every inner words should startwith uppercase character (PascalCase Convention)

example : Runnable 


Coding standards for methods

1. usually method names are either verbs or verb noun combination should start with lowercase alphabet and if it contains multiple words, every inner words should start with uppercase character (CamelCase Convention)

example : print(), getName() 



Coding standards for variables

1. Usually variable names are nouns should start with lowercase alphabet symbol and if it contains multiple words then every inner word should start with uppercase character. (Camelcase Convention)

example : name, mobileNumber


Coding Standards for constants

1. Usually constant name are nouns and should contain only uppercase characters and if contains multiple words then these words are separated with underscore symbol

example : MAX_VALUE, MAX_PRIORITY

2. Usually we can declare constants with public static and final modifiers


Java Bean Coding Standards


1. A Java Bean is a simple java class with private properties and public getter and setter methods.

class name ends with Bean is not official convention from SUN

```java
public class StudentBean{
    private String name;

    public void setName (String name){
        this.name = name;
    }

    public String getName(){
        return name;
    }
}
```


Syntax for setter method

It should be public method and the return type should be void. Method name should be prefiexed with set and it should take some argument and it should not be no argument method.


Syntax for getter method

It should be public method and the return type should not be void. Method name should be prefixed with get and it should not take any argument.

Note: for boolean properties getter method name can be prefixed with either get or is but recommended to use is

example 


```
public boolean getEmpty(){
    return empty
}
```

```
public boolean isEmpty(){
    return empty
}
```

Coding Standards for Listeners

Case 1: To register a listener method name should be prefixed with add.

Valid👇
```
public void addMyActionListener(myActionListener l){

}
```
Invalid👇
```
public void registerMyActionListener(myActionListener l){

}
```
Invalid👇
```
public void addMyActionListener(ActionListener l){

}
```

Case 2 : To unregister a listener, method name should be prefixed with remove.



Valid👇
```
public void removeMyActionListener(myActionListener l){

}
```
Invalid👇
```
public void unRegisterMyActionListener(myActionListener l){

}
```
Invalid👇
```
public void removedMyActionListener(ActionListener l){

}
```
Invalid👇
```
public void deleteMyActionListener(myActionListener l){

}
```