Whenever we are writing our own classes we have to provide some information about our class to the JVM like whether this class can be accessible from anywhere or not, wether child class creation is possible or not, or object creation is possbile or not

We can specify this information by using appropriate modifiers

- public
- private
- default
- protected
- final
- abstract
- static
- synchronized
- native
- strictfp
- transient
- volatile



The only applicable modifiers for top level classes are public, <default>, final , abstract, strictfp but for innerclasses the applicable modifiers are public, <default>, final , abstract, strictfp, private, protected, static.



```
private class Test {
    public static void main(String[] args){
        System.out.println("hello")
    }
}
```

```
CE : modifier private not allowed here
```




```
11. private class A{
12.
13.}
14.
15.static class B{
16.
17.}
18.
19.public static void main(String[] args){
20.  System.out.println("Hello");
21.}

```


Access specifiers vs Access modifiers


public, private, protected are considered as specifiers except these remaining are considered as modifiers but these rule is applicable for old languages like C++.

In Java all are considered as modifiers only there is no word like specifier


```java

private class Test {

}
```

```
CE : modifier private not allowed here
```



**public classes**

If a class declared as public then we can access that class from anywhere.


compiled 
```java
package pack1;


public class A {
    public void m1(){
        Sytem.out.println("hello:")
    }
}
```
```
pack1
|- A.class
```


```java

package pack2;
import pack1.A;


class B {
    public static void main(String[] A){
        A a = new A ();
        a.m1();
    }
}
```


If class A is not public then while compiling B class we will get compile time error saying pack1.A is not public in pack1 : cannot be accessed from outside package.


**default classes**


If a classed declared as default then we can access that class only within current package that is from outside package we cant access.Hence default access is also known as package level access.


**final modifier**


final is a modifier applicable for classes methods and variables

**final method**

Whatever method parent has by default available to child through inheritance if the child not satisfied with parent method implementation then child is allowed to redefine that method bases on its requirement this process is called overriding.

If parent class method is declared final we cant override that method in child class because its implementation is final.





```java

class P {
    public void property (){
        System.out.println("house+car")
    }

    public final void marry (){
        System.out.println("subalaxmi")
    }
}

class C extends P {
    public void property (){
        System.out.println("house+car")
    }

    public void marry (){
        System.out.println("Jenny")
    }
}
```


```
CE: marry() in C cannot override marry() in P overridden method is final.
```

**final class**

If a class declared as final we cant extend functionality of that class i.e we cant create child class for that class ie inheritance is not possible for final classes.


```java


final class P{

}

class C extends P {

}


```
```
CE: cannot inherit from final P
```


Note : Every method present inside final class is always final by default but every variable present inside final class need not be final.

The main advantage of final keyword is we can acheive security and we can provide unique implementation but the main disadvantage of final keyword is we are missing key benefits of OOPS : Inheritance (final classes), Polymorphism (final method cannot be Overridden)

If there is not specific requirement then it is not recommended to use final keyword.


**abstract modifier**

abstract is a modifier applicable for classes and methods but not for variables

**abstract method**


```java
abstract class Vehicle {
    abstract public int getNoOfWheels()
}

class Bus extends Vehicle{
    public int getNoOfWheels(){
        return 7;
    }
}

class Auto extends Vehicle{
    public int getNoOfWheels(){
        return 3;
    }
}
```

Even though we dont know about implementation still we can declare a method with abstract modifier ie for abstract method only declaration is available not implementation hence abstract method declaration should end with ";"

> public abstract void m1( ); (valid)

> public abstract void m1( ){ } (invalid)


child class is responsible to provide implementation for parent class abstract methods.

By declaring abstract method in parent class we can provide guidelines to child class such that which methods compulsory child has to implement.


abstract method never talks about implementation if any modifier talks about implementation then it forms illegal combination with abstract modifier the following are various illegal combination of modifiers for methods with respect to abstract


abstract - final
abstract - native
abstract - synchronized
abstract - static
abstract -  private
abstract -  strictfp

example
> abstract final void m1 ( ) ;

CE: Illegal combination of modifiers abstract and final


**Abstract class**

For any java class if we are not allowed to create an object because of partial implementation such type of class we have to declare with abstract modifier ie for abstract class instantiation is not possible.

```java

abstract class Test {
    public static void main(String[] args){
        Test t = new Test()
    }
}

```

```
CE : Test is abstract; cannot be instantiated
```

**abstract class vs abstract method**

1. If a class contains atleast one abstract method then compulsory we should declare class as abstract otherwise we will get compile time error. Reason = If a class contains atleast one abstract method then implementation is not complete and hence it is not recommended to create object to restrict object instantiation compulsory we should declare class as abstract


2. Even thought class doesnt contain any abstract method still we can declare class as abstract if we dont want instantiation ie abstract class can contain zero number of abstract method also.


example : HTTPServlet class is abstract but it doesnt contain any abstract method

example : Every Adapter class is recommended to declare as abstract but it doesnt contain any abstract method.

```java

class P {
    public void m1();
}
```
```
CE: missing method body, or declare abstract
```


```java

class P {
    public abstract void m1(){

    }
}
```
```
CE: abstract methods cannot have a body
```



```java

class P {
    public abstract void m1();
}
```
```
CE: P is not abstract and does not override abstract method m1() in P
```




If we are extending abstract then for each and every abstract method of abstract class we should provide implementation otherwise we have to declare child class as abstract. In this case next level child class is responsible to provide implementation

```java

abstract class P {
    public abstract void m1();
    public abstract void m2();

}


class C extends P {
    public void m1 (){

    }
}
```
```
CE : C is not abstract and doesnt override abstract method m1() in P
```



**final vs abstract**

Abstract methods compulsory we should override in child classes to provide implementation whereas we cant override final methods, hence final abstract combination is illegal combination for methods

For final classes we cant create child class whereas for abstract classes we should create child class to provide implementation hence final and abstract combination is illegal for classes and methods

Inside abstract class is it possible to declare final method ? Inside final class is it possible to declare abstract method ?

Abstract class can contain final method, whereas final class cant contain abstract method.



```java (valid) 

abstract class Test{
    public final void m1(){

    }
}

```



```java (invalid)


final class Test{
    public abstract void m1();
}
```


It is highly recommended to use abstract modifier because it promotes several OOP feature like inheritance and polymorphism.






**strictfp** (strict floating point)


Introduce in 1.2 Version we can declare / use strictfp for classes and methods but not for variables.

Usually the result of floating point of arithmetic is varied from platform to platform if we want platform independent results for floating point arithmetic then we should go for strictfp modifier


**strictfp method**

If a method declared as strictfp all floating point calculations in that method has to follow IEEE 754 standard so that we will get platform independent results

```java

strictfp public void m1(){
    System.out.println(10.0/3);
}
```


abstract modifier never talks about implementation whereas strictfp method always talks about implementation hence abstract strictfp combination is illegal for methods.


**strictfp class**

If a class declared as strictfp then every floating point calculation present in concrete method has to follow IEE754 standard so that we will get platform independent result.

We can declare abstract strictfp combination for classes ie abstract strictfp combination is legal for classes but illegal for methods.

```java (valid)
abstract strictfp class Test {

}
```


```java (invalid)
abstract strictfp void m1();

```
```
CE: Illegal combination of modifiers abstract and strictfp
```




