

** Member Modifiers  (method or variable level modifiers) **


public member : If a member declared as public then we can access that member from anywhere but corresponding class should be visible ie that is before checking memeber visiblity we have to check class visiblity.


```java

package pack1;

class A {
    public void m1() {
        System.out.println("A class Method");
    }
}
```


```java

package pack 2;

import pack1.A;

class B {
    public static void main(String[] args){
        A a = new A ();
        a.m1();
    }
}
```

```text
CE : pack:A is not public in pack1; cannot be accessed from outside package
```

In the above example even though m1 method is public we cant access from outside package because corresponding class A is not public ie if both class and method are public then only we can access that method from outside package.


** default members **

Default members - If a member declared as default then we can access that member only within the current package ie from outside of the package we cant access hence default access is also known as pacakage level access


** private member **

If a member is a private then we can access that member only within a class ie from outside of a class we cant access. 

abstract methods should be available to the child classes to provide implementatoin whereas private methods are not available to child class to provide implementation hence private abstract combination is illegal for methods.

** protected members ** 

The most misunderstood modifier in java.

If a member declared as protected then we can access that member anywhere within current package and only in child classes of outside package

> protected = <default> + child_classes


```java

package pack1;

public class A {
    protected void m1 () {
        System.out.println("The most misunderstood modifier")
    }
}

```


Below code is valid : 

```java 

package pack1;


class B extends A {

    public static void main(String[] args){
        A a = new A ();
        a.m1();

        B b = new B ();
        b.m1();

        A a1 = new B ();
        a1.m1();
    }
}
```



```java

package pack2;

import pack1.A;

class C extends A {
    public static void main (String[] args){
        A a = new A ();
        a.m1();   // CE : m1 has protected access in pack1.A

        C c = new C ();
        c.m1(); 

        A a1 = new C ();
        a1.m1(); // CE : m1 has protected access in pack1.A
    }
}
```

We can access protected members within the current package anywhere either by using parent reference or by using child reference but we can access protected member outside package only in child classes and we should use child reference only


parent reference cannot be used to access protected members from outside package.



```java

package pack2;


import pack1.A;

class C extends A {
    
}


class D extends C {

    public static void main (String[] args){

        A a = new A ();
        a.m1(); // CE : m1() has protected access in pack1.A

        C c = new C ();
        c.m1(); // CE : m1() has protected access in pack1.A

        D d = new D ();
        d.m1();

        A a1 = new C ();
        a1.m1(); // CE : m1() has protected access in pack1.A

        A a1 = new D ();
        a1.m1(); // CE : m1() has protected access in pack1.A

        C c1 = new D ();
        c1.m1(); // CE : m1() has protected access in pack1.A
    }
}
```



Summary Table : 


We can access protected members from outside package only in child classes and we should use that child class reference only.

from D class if we want to access then we should use D class reference only



| visiblitiy |  private | default | protected | public |
|-|-|-|-|-|
within the same class | yes | yes | yes | yes |
from child class of same package | no | yes | yes | yes |
from non child class of same package | no | yes | yes | yes|
from child class of outside package | non | no | yes, but we should use child reference only  | yes
from non child class of outside package | no | no | no | yes 


> private  < default < protected < public 

The most restricted access modifier is private, the most accessible modifier is public.



Recommended modifier for data member (variable) is private but recommended modifier for methods in public