The main objective of new operator is to create an object the main purpose of constructor is to initialize that object

First Object will be created by using new operator and then initialization will be performed by constructor


```java


class Student {
    String name;
    int rollno;

    Student (String name, int rollno){ // Constructor performing initialization
        this.name = name;
        this.rollno = rollno;
    }
}
```
```
                        To initialize object
                            |
Student s = new Student ("durga" , 101);
             |
            Responsible to
            create object
```

Before constructor only object is ready and hence within the constructor we can access object properties like hashcode.




**Whenever we are creating child class object, what is the need of executing parent class constructor ?**

Whenever we are creating child class object, Parent constructor will be executed to perform initialization for the instance variables which are inheriting from parent.



```java

class Person {
    String name;
    int age;

    Person(String name, int age){
        this.name = name;
        this.age = age;
    }


    class Student extends Person {
        int rollno;
        int marks;
        
        Student(String name, int age, int rollno, int marks){
            super(name, age)
            this.rollno = rollno;
            this.marks = marks;
        }
    }

    Student s = new Student ("durga", 48, 101, 15);
}

```


```
s -> name : durga // this initialization performed by parent constructor
     age : 48 // this initialization performed by parent constructor
     rollno : 101 // this initialization performed by child constructor
     marks : 15 // this initialization performed by child constructor
```

In the above program both parent and child constructor executed for child object initialization only.

Whenever we are creating an object automatically constructor will be executed but it may be one constructor or multiple constructor

Whenever we are creating child class object parent constructor will be executed but parent object wont be created

```java

class P {
    P (){
        System.out.println(this.hashCode()); //11394033
    }
}

class C extends P {
    C (){
        System.out.println(this.hashCode()); //11394033
    }
}

class Test {
    public static void main (String[] args){

        C c  = new C ();

        System.out.println(c.hashCode()); //11394033
    }
}

```
In above example we just created only child class object but both parent and child constructor executed for child class object






**Anyways we cannot create object for abstract class either directly or indirectly, But abstract class can contain constructor. What is the need ?**

We cannot create object for abstract either directly or indirectly but abstract class can contain constructor what is the need. The main objective of abstract class constructor is to perform initialization for the instance variables which are inheriting from abstract class to the child class.

Whenever we are creating child class object automatically abstract class constructor will be executed to perform initialization for the instance variables which are inheriting from abstract class (code reusablity)

Approach 1 : Without having constructor in abstract class - More code, More redundancy (not recommended)


```java

abstract class Person {
    String name ;
    int age;
    // ... 100 properties
}


class Student extends Person {
    int rollno;

    Student (String name, int age , ...){
        this.name = name;
        this.age = age;
        ...
        this.rollno = rollno;
    }
}

Student s = new Student (101 properties)


class Teacher extends Person {
    int subject;

    Student (String name, int age , ...){
        this.name = name;
        this.age = age;
        ...
        this.subject = subject;
    }
}

Teacher t = new Teacher (101 properties)
```



Approach 2 : With Having constructor in Abstract Class - Less Code and Code reusablity


```java

abstract class Person {
    String name ;
    int age;
    // ... 100 properties

    Person (String name, int age,  ...) { // This constructor will work for every child object initialization
        this.name = name;
        this.age = age;
        //... 100 lines of code
    }
}


class Student extends Person {
    int rollno;

    Student (String name, int age , ...){
        super(...); // ... are 100 attribute values
        this.rollno = rollno;
    }
}

Student s = new Student (...) // ... are 101 attribute values


class Teacher extends Person {
    int subject;

    Student (String name, int age , ...){
        super(...); // ... are  100 properties
        this.subject = subject;
    }
}

Teacher t = new Teacher (...) // ... are 101 properties
```


**As we cannot create object for Abstract class and Interface. But Abstract class can contain Constructor but Interface doesn't Why?**

The main purpose of constructor is to perform initialization of an object ie to perform initialization for instance variables. Abstract class can contain instance variables which are required for child class object to perform initialization for these instance variables constructor concept is required for abstract classes.

Every variable present inside interface is always public static final whether we are declaring or not hence there is no chance of existing instance variables inside interface because of this constructor concept not required for interfaces.

Every interface variable we should perform initialization at the time of declaration due to this intialization of instance variables concept not applicable for Interface.


```java

abstract class Person {
    String name;
    int age;

    Person (String name, int age){
        this.name = name
        this.age = age
    }
}
```

```java
interface Interf {
    int x = 10; // public static final 
}
```


**Inside Interface we can take only abstract methods but in abstract class also we can take only abstract methods based on our requirement. the what is need of interface ie Is it possible to replace interface concept with abstract class ?**

If everything is abstract it is highly recommended to go for interface but not abstract class we can replace inteface with abstract class but it is not goood programming practice this is something like recruiting IAS officer for sweeping purpose


Approach 1 ðŸ‘


```java

abstract class X {

}

class Test extends X{

}


```

While extending abstract class it is not possible to extend any other class and hence we are missing inheritance benefit

In this case object creation is costly
> Test t = new Test1()


Approach 2 ðŸ‘


```java

interface X {

}

class Test implements X{

}

```

While implementing interface we can extend some other class and we wont miss any inheritanc benefit

In this case object creation is not costly (no parent constructor execution or initialization)

> Test t = new Test(); 2 sec



**Which of the following are valid**


1. The purpose of constructor is to create an object (invalid)

2. The purpose of constructor is to initialize an object but not to create object (valid)

3. Once a constructor completes then only object creation complete (invalid)

4. first object will be created then constructor will be executed (valid)

5. The purpose of new keyword is to create object and purpose of constructor is to initialize the object. (valid)

6. we cant create object for abstract class directly but indirectly we can create (invalid)

7. Whenever we are creating child class object automatically parent class object will be created internally (invalid)

8. whenever we are creating child class object automatically abstract class constructor will be executed. (valid)

9. whenever we are creating child class object automatically parent object will be created (invalid)

10. whenever we are creating child class object automatically parent constructor will be executed but parent object wont be created (valid)

11. Either directly or indirectly we cant create object for abstract class and hence constructor concept is not applicable for abstract class (invalid)

12. Interface can contain constructor (invalid)