

Import statement



```java


class Test{
    public static void main(String[] args){
        ArrayList al = new ArrayList();
    }
}
```

CE: cannot fine symbol
symbol : class ArrayList
location : class Test


we can solve this problem by using ==fully qualified name==  

> java.util.ArrayList al = new java.util.ArrayList ();


The problem of usage with fully qualified name is it increases length of code and reduces readablity. We can solve this problem by using import statement

Whenever we are writing import statement it is not required to write fully qualified name everytime we can use short name directly


```java

import java.util.ArrayList;

class Test{
    public static void main(String[] args){
        ArrayList al = new ArrayList();
    }
}
```

> ArrayList is short name


==import== statement acts as typing shortcut.




**Type of import Statements**

There are two types of import statement : Explicit class import and Implicit class import

- Explicit class Import (use this only) : It is highly recommended to use explicity class import because it improve readablity of code. Readablity is import

> import java.uti.ArrayList

- Implicit class Import : Not recommended to use because it reduces readablity of code. Best suitable where typing is important.

> import java.util.*







Case 2 : 

Which of the following import statement are meaningful


```
import java.util.ArrayList; 
import java.util.ArrayList.*
import java.util.*;
import java.util;

```
Case 3: Consider the following code

> class myObject extends java.rmi.UnicastRemoteObject

The code compiles fine even though we are not writing import statement because we used fully qualified name
whenever we are using fully qualified name it is not required to write import statement

Similarly we are writing import statement it is not required to use fully qualified name.

Case 4: 


```
import java.util.*;
import java.sql.*;

class Test {
    public static void main(String[] args){
        Date d = new Date();
    }
}
```


```
CE : reference to Date is ambigous;
```

Case 5 : 
Even in the case of List also we may get same ambiguity problem because it is available in both util and awt packages



```java
import java.util.Date;
import java.sql.*;

class Test {
    public static void main(String[] args){
        Date d = new Date(); //util package date considered
    }
}
```

While resolving class name compiler will always give precedence in following order. 

Explicit Class Import > Classes present in current working directory (default package) > Implicit Class Import



Case 6 :

Whenever we are importing a java package all classes and interfaces present in the package by default available but not subpackage classes if we want to use subpackage class compulsory we should write import statement until subpackage level.

To use pattern class in program which import statement is required

```
File Structure

java 
    |- util
        |-  regex
            |-  pattern

```
```
import java.*;

import java.util.*;

import java.util.regex.*; (required)

No import required
```

Case 7 : 

All classes and interfaces present in the following packages are by default available to every java program hence we are not required to write import statement

- java.lang

- default package (cwd)


Case 8 :

Import statement is totally compile time related concept if more number of import then more will be compile time.

But there is no effect on execution time (runtime) 


Difference between #include<stdio.h> and import java.io.*

In case of #include<stdio.h>  all input output file will be loaded in the beginning only at translation time. Hence it is static include.

But in the case of java import statement no .class file will be loaded in the beginning whenever we are using particular class then only corresponding .class will be loaded. This is like dynamic include or load on demand or load on fly.





1.5 version new features

- for-each loop
- var-arg methods
- autoboxing & autounboxing
- generics
- co-varient return types
- queue
- annotations
- enum
- static import



**static import**

Introduced in 1.5 version, According to SUN usage of static import reduces length of the code and improves readablity but according to world wide programming experts (like us) usage of static import creates confusion and reduces readablity hence if there is no specific requirement then it is not recommended to use static import.




without static import

```java

import java.lang.Math;

class Test {
    public static void main (String[] args){
        System.out.println(Math.sqrt(5));
        System.out.println(Math.max(10, 29));
        System.out.println(Math.random());

    }
}
```


with static import

```java

import static java.lang.Math.*;

class Test {
    public static void main (String[] args){
        System.out.println(sqrt(5));
        System.out.println(max(10, 29));
        System.out.println(random());

    }
}
```

Usually we can access static member by using class name but whenever we are writing static import we can access static members directly without class name.

```java
class Test{
    static String s = "Jiganesh";
}
```

> Test.s.length()



Explain about System.out.println ?

System is a class present  in java.lang package;

out is the static variable present in System class of type PrintStream;

println() is method in PrintStream class

```java


class System{
    static PrintStream out;
}
```

> System.out.println()


```java
import static java.lang.System.out;


class Test{
    public static void main(String[] args){
        out.println("Hello")// Hello
    }
}

```

out is a static variable present in a System class hence we can access by using class name system.
but whenever we are writing static import it is not required to write class name and use directly.



import static java.lang.Integer.*;
import static java.lang.Byte.*;




public class Test{
    public static void main (String[] args){
        System.out.println(MAX_VALUE);
    }
}

> CE: reference to MAX_VALUE is ambigous







While resolving static members the compiler will always consider precendence in following order Current class static value > Explicit static import > Implicit static import;


```java

import static java.lang.Integer.MAX_VALUE;
import static java.lang.BYTE.*;


public class Test{
    static int MAX_VALUE = 999;

    public static void main(String[] args){
        System.out.println(MAX_VALUE); // 999;
    }
}
```



```java

import static java.lang.Integer.MAX_VALUE;
import static java.lang.BYTE.*;


public class Test{
    // static int MAX_VALUE = 999; commenting

    public static void main(String[] args){
        System.out.println(MAX_VALUE); // 2147483647 ;
    }
}
```




```java

// import static java.lang.Integer.MAX_VALUE; commented
import static java.lang.BYTE.*;


public class Test{
    // static int MAX_VALUE = 999; commenting

    public static void main(String[] args){
        System.out.println(MAX_VALUE); // 127 ;
    }
}
```



Normal Import

1. Explicit Import
> import packagename.classname;

example : import java.util.ArrayList;

2. Implicit import
> import packagename.*;

example : java.util.*;


3. Explicit static import
> import static packagename.classname.staticmember;

example : import static java.lang.Math.sqrt;
          import static java.lang.System.out;


4. Implicit static import
> import static packagename.classname.*;

example : import static java.lang.Math.*;
          import static java.lang.System.*;




Find valid and invalid import statements


```
import java.lang.Math.*;    (invalid)
import static java.lang.Math.*;   (valid)
import java.lang.Math.sqrt; (invalid)
import static java.lang.Math.sqrt(); (invalid)
import java.lang.Math.sqrt.*;  (invalid)
import static java.lang.Math.sqrt;   (valid)
import java.lang;  (invalid)
import static java.lang; (invalid)
import java.lang.*;   (valid)
import static java.lang.*; (invalid)

```