Whenever we are writing our own classes we have to provide some information about our class to the JVM like whether this class can be accessible from anywhere or not, wether child class creation is possible or not, or object creation is possbile or not

We can specify this information by using appropriate modifiers

- public
- private
- default
- protected
- final
- abstract
- static
- synchronized
- native
- strictfp
- transient
- volatile



The only applicable modifiers for top level classes are public, <default>, final , abstract, strictfp but for innerclasses the applicable modifiers are public, <default>, final , abstract, strictfp, private, protected, static.



```
private class Test {
    public static void main(String[] args){
        System.out.println("hello")
    }
}
```

```
CE : modifier private not allowed here
```




```
11. private class A{
12.
13.}
14.
15.static class B{
16.
17.}
18.
19.public static void main(String[] args){
20.  System.out.println("Hello");
21.}

```


Access specifiers vs Access modifiers


public, private, protected are considered as specifiers except these remaining are considered as modifiers but these rule is applicable for old languages like C++.

In Java all are considered as modifiers only there is no word like specifier


```java

private class Test {

}
```

```
CE : modifier private not allowed here
```



**public classes**

If a class declared as public then we can access that class from anywhere.


compiled 
```java
package pack1;


public class A {
    public void m1(){
        Sytem.out.println("hello:")
    }
}
```
```
pack1
|- A.class
```


```java

package pack2;
import pack1.A;


class B {
    public static void main(String[] A){
        A a = new A ();
        a.m1();
    }
}
```


If class A is not public then while compiling B class we will get compile time error saying pack1.A is not public in pack1 : cannot be accessed from outside package.


**default classes**


If a classed declared as default then we can access that class only within current package that is from outside package we cant access.Hence default access is also known as package level access.


**final modifier**


final is a modifier applicable for classes methods and variables

**final method**

Whatever method parent has by default available to child through inheritance if the child not satisfied with parent method implementation then child is allowed to redefine that method bases on its requirement this process is called overriding.

If parent class method is declared final we cant override that method in child class because its implementation is final.





```java

class P {
    public void property (){
        System.out.println("house+car")
    }

    public final void marry (){
        System.out.println("subalaxmi")
    }
}

class C extends P {
    public void property (){
        System.out.println("house+car")
    }

    public void marry (){
        System.out.println("Jenny")
    }
}
```


```
CE: marry() in C cannot override marry() in P overridden method is final.
```

**final class**

If a class declared as final we cant extend functionality of that class i.e we cant create child class for that class ie inheritance is not possible for final classes.


```java


final class P{

}

class C extends P {

}


```
```
CE: cannot inherit from final P
```


Note : Every method present inside final class is always final by default but every variable present inside final class need not be final.

The main advantage of final keyword is we can acheive security and we can provide unique implementation but the main disadvantage of final keyword is we are missing key benefits of OOPS : Inheritance (final classes), Polymorphism (final method cannot be Overridden)

If there is not specific requirement then it is not recommended to use final keyword.


**abstract modifier**

abstract is a modifier applicable for classes and methods but not for variables

**abstract method**


```java
abstract class Vehicle {
    abstract public int getNoOfWheels()
}

class Bus extends Vehicle{
    abstract public int getNoOfWheels(){
        return 7;
    }
}

class Auto extends Vehicle{
    abstract public int getNoOfWheels(){
        return 3;
    }
}
```

Even though we dont know about implementation still we can declare a method with abstract modifier ie for abstract method only declaration is available not implementation hence abstract method declaration should end with ";"

> public abstract void m1( ); (valid)

> public abstract void m1( ){ } (invalid)


child class is responsible to provide implementation for parent class abstract methods.

By declaring abstract method in parent class we can provide guidelines to child class such that which methods compulsory child has to implement.

