** final variable **


final instance variables : 

If the value of a variable is varied from object to object such type of variables are called instance variables.

For every object separate copy of instance variable will be created.

For instance variable we are not required to perform initialization explicitly - JVM will always provide default values


```java

class Test {
    int x ;
    public static void main( String [] args){
        System.out.println(x) // 0
    }
}

```

If the instance variable declared as final then compulsory we have to perform initialization explicitly whether we are using or not and JVM wont provide default values.

```java

class Test {
    final int x ;
    public static void main( String [] args){
        System.out.println(x) // CE : variable x might not have been initialized
    }
}

```


RULE : For final instance variable compulsory we should perform initialization before constructor completion


The following are various places for initialization ðŸ‘

At the time of declaration

```
class Test {
    final int x = 10;
}

```


Inside instance block

```
class Test {
    final int x ;
    {
        x = 10;
    }
}
```

Inside Constructor
```

class Test {
    final int x;

    Test () {
        x = 10;
    }
}
```

these are the only possible places to perform initialization for final instance variable if we are trying to perform initialization anywhere else we will get compile time error.




```java
class Test {
    final int x;
    public void m1(){ 
        x = 10;
    }
}
```

CE : cannot assign a value to final instance variable x

As method will be executed after the constructor we will get above CE 



**final static variable**

If the value of a variable is not varied from object to object such type of variables are not recommended to declare as instance variable we have to declare those variable as static variable by using static modifier

In the case of instance variable for every object a separate copy will be created but in the case of static variable a single copy will be created at class level and shared by every object of that class.

for static variable it is not required to perform initialization explicitly JVM will always provide default values. 




```java

class Test {
    static int x;
    public static void main (String [] args){
        System.out.println(x); // 0
    }
}
```


If the static variable declared as final then compulsory we should perform initialization explicity ly otherwise we will get compile time error and JVM wont provide any default values.


class Test {
    final static int x;
}


CE : variable x might not have been initialized

Rule : Before class loading completion we should perform initialization


for final static variables compulsory we should perform initialization befor class loading completion ie the following are various places for this.


At the time for declaration

```

class Test {

    final static int x = 19;
}

```


Inside static block 

```

class Test {
    final static int x;
    static {
        x = 19;
    }
}


```


class Test {
    final static int x;

    public void m1(){
        x=10;
    }
}


CE : cannot assign a value to final variable x 


These are the only possible places to perform initialization for final static variable if we are trying to perform initialization anywhere else we will get compile time error.


**final local variables**


Sometimes to meet temporary requirement of progrrammer we have to declare variables inside a method or block or constructor such type of variables are called local variables, temporary variable, stack variables or automatic variables.

For local variables JVM wont provide any default values compulsory we should perform initialization explicitly before using that local variable ie if we are not using then it is not required to perform initiazliation for lcal variable.

compiles ->
```

class Test {
    public static void main (String[] args){
        int x ;
        System.out.println("hell") // hell
    }
}

```



```

class Test {
    public static void main (String[] args){
        int x ;
        System.out.println(x);
    }
}

```

CE : variable x might not have been initialized




Even though local variable is final before using only we have to perform initialization if we are not using then it is not required to perform initialization even though it is final.

```
class Test{
    public static void main (String[] args){
        final int x;
        System.out.println("hello");
    }
}

```

O/p : hello


The only applicable modifier for local variable is final by mistake if we are trying to apply any other modifier then we will get compile time error.


```
class Test {
    public static void main (String[] args){
        public int x = 10;   // CE : illegal start of expression 
        private int x = 10;   // CE : illegal start of expression 
        protected int x = 10;   // CE : illegal start of expression 
        static int x = 10;   // CE : illegal start of expression 
        transient int x = 10;   // CE : illegal start of expression 
        volatie int x = 10;   // CE : illegal start of expression 


        final int x = 10; // Valid
    }
}
```


Note : if we are not declaring any modifier then by default it is default but this rule is applicable only for instance and static variable but not for local variables.

Formal parameters of a method simply acts as local variables of that method hence formal parameter can be declared as final. If a formal parameter declared as final then witin a method we cannot perform reassignment.



```
class Test {
    public static void main (String[] args){
        m1(10, 20);
    }

    public static void m1 ( final int x , final int y){

        x = 100; // CE : cannot assign value to final variable x
        y = 200; // CE : cannot assign value to final variable y

        System.out.println(x + y)

    }
}

```